---
title: Get Cooler Post Title
description: Just a log of random stuff mostly book reviews
author: rejuvyesh
status: finished
lastmodified: 11 April, 2013
belief: log
tags: books, log 
---

It's been a long time since I posted something. Nothing substantial here, so you might as well skip it.

First the vacations. If you believe that there could be something more productive than preparing for the upcoming quizzes, then this vacation turned out to be immensely productive. On the one hand, I managed to complete six books (4 of them no-fiction) while surprisingly on the social front too it went quite well. I managed to talk an elder person (one of my friend's father) for more than two hours on a trot with topics ranging from whether Hinduism should even be considered a religion to how the same people who refuse to follow any rules here in India tend to follow every rule when out in _phoren_ land ^[It's been some time since the conversation happened and I have forgotten lot of stuff.]. This must surely be a new record for me, in terms of social interaction. This incident led to another interesting observation about the human need to communicate. When I and my friends had started talking he was not feeling well and we thought we were going to disturb his rest. But amazingly he recovered while talking to us and his fever was gone too ^[Of-course this has an explanation in human physiology, but that's not the point]. To top it all I even had substantial talk with my parents (Something other than about myself. If you are so interested shoot me an email.) Not to forget I completed Season 1 of _The Wire_ and Season 2 of _Community_.

******

So, the books...

I started with **Dan Ariely's** _The Upside of Rationality_. Even though I think this book was well written, it didn't have much to offer to me personally.For example, if you are a follower of the [Less Wrong](http://lesswrong.com) blog, you'll be left shouting different words for the same phenomenon. ^[For example on one of his chapters on how humans are bad at big numbers, I kept shouting (in my mind) [scope insensitivity](http://lesswrong.com/lw/hw/scope_insensitivity/)] again and again.]. Yet if you are into rationality and such stuff and don't believe in whiling your time reading random blog posts, I'd still recommend it ^[Not that you are asking for any, right?].

Next to be completed was **Lee Child's** _Killing Floor_. I would recommend against reading it as it completely failed for me as a mystery novel. Shouting at the protagonist for being so thickheaded to see what's so evident to yourself when less than half way through the novel is not my idea of a fun mystery novel.

Another fiction that I read was _The Colder War_, a novella by **Charles Stross**^[Available [here](http://www.infinityplus.co.uk/stories/colderwar.htm)]. It's a delightful SF take on the Cold War period.

Now to the truly fantastic books I read/completed.

_Understanding Comics_ by **Scott McCloud**: I hardly used to read any comic except for those part of the newspaper syndication. Then I was introduced to the world of web-comics by [XKCD](http://xkcd.com/) ^[An interesting article about web comics recently appeared in the Economist: [Triumph of the Nerds](http://www.economist.com/news/christmas-specials/21568586-internet-has-unleashed-burst-cartooning-creativity-triumph-nerds)]. Even then it was like yeah - cool stuff; but none of them are long enough to tell a real story. But then I recently read the _Death Note_ Manga and _The Watchmen_ and I was like... **What???**^[Not to forget classic _Calvin & Hobbes_] I couldn't believe comics could be so great as a medium of story telling. This book forces you to think deeply about the characteristics, wholly unique to this art form. Two ideas that particularly struck me were "closure" - "phenomenon of observing the parts but perceiving the whole" and our preference for stylized characters rather than realistic ones - how when you talk to someone else, you see their face in intimate detail; but your own face is just an abstract, stylized image in your head. Hence our identification with stylized, abstract faces.

_The Information_ by **James Gleick**: A fairly detailed history of the current hyper-information society. It started out with a bang - _literally_, with how African drums were used for transmitting information. I had heard of Babbage, but before this book I didn't know just how interesting character he was. Consider the following excerpts:

> As a young man, stopping at an inn in the north of England, he was amused to hear that his fellow travelers had been debating his trade: \ \ \
> "The tall gentleman in the corner," said my informant, "maintained you were in the hardware line; whilst the fat gentleman who sat next to you at supper was quite sure that you were in the spirit trade. Another of the party declared that they were both mistaken: he said you were travelling for a great iron-master." \ \ \
> "Well," said I, "you, I presume, knew my vocation better than our friends." \ \ \
> "Yes," said my informant, "I knew perfectly well that you were in the Nottingham lace trade." 

> Still an undergraduate, he aimed at a new revival of English mathematics—a suitable cause for founding an advocacy group and launching a crusade. He joined with two other promising students, John Herschel and George Peacock, to form what they named the Analytical Society, “for the propagation of d’s” and against “the heresy of dots,” or as Babbage said, “the Dot-age of the University.” (He was pleased with his own “wicked pun.”) In their campaign to free the calculus from English dotage, Babbage lamented “the cloud of dispute and national acrimony, which has been thrown over its origin.” Never mind if it seemed French. He declared, “We have now to re-import the exotic, with nearly a century of foreign improvement, and to render it once more indigenous among us.” They were rebels against Newton in the heart of Newton-land. They met over breakfast every Sunday after chapel. \ 
> “Of course we were much ridiculed by the Dons,” Babbage recalled. “It was darkly hinted that we were young infidels, and that no good would come of us.” Yet their evangelism worked: the new methods spread from the bottom up, students learning faster than their teachers. “The brows of many a Cambridge moderator were elevated, half in ire, half in admiration, at the unusual answers which began to appear in examination papers,”♦ wrote Herschel. The dots of Newton faded from the scene, his fluxions replaced by the notation and language of Leibniz.

Although in the end it tapered off when dealing with the modern ideas like cryptography and more or less missed projects like inter-continental fiber-optics and Google Books. ^[Also it could be just because I have read Neal Stephenson's [Mother Earth Motherboard](http://www.wired.com/wired/archive/4.12/ffglass.html) and _Cryptonomicon_, which were much more detailed investigation of such topics. But I do believe that any discussion of information history cannot be complete without seriously discussing these topics.]

_Understanding Power: The Indispensable Chomsky_ by **Noam Chomsky**: I got to know about this when [Aaron Swartz](http://wayback.archive.org/web/20130326003201/http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/epiphany) mentioned this book as a life changing experience. I had been reading this book since quite some time. I started pretty innocuously with something I remembered pretty well from my 10th standard Political Science textbook^[Which incidentally is one of the best textbooks I have read. I hope they haven't completely dropped it by now] - how the Chilean president Salvador Allende was overthrown in a coup engineered by the CIA in 1973. But then it only got more and more depressing as I read forward. I was never in any sort of delusion about US as a nation, yet I hadn't expected to be as bad - especially the state of media. And the authors know that you are unlikely to believe any of the claims they are making, so they have carefully footnoted and documented everything. It was not as crushing as it might have had been a US citizen. This might be that I am little more cynical about human matters and it was more of a third person thing for me anyway. Although on the literary front it wasn't very well written, but then it is a collection of transcripts of group discussions with Chomsky - not exactly a book. ^[A brilliant parody of this writing is available at [McSweeney's](http://www.mcsweeneys.net/articles/unused-audio-commentary-by-howard-zinn-and-noam-chomsky-recorded-summer-2002-for-the-fellowship-of-the-ring-platinum-series-extended-edition-dvd-part-one)]

******

Not exactly during the vacations, I recently finished _The UNIX Haters Handbook_ ^[Available here]. I found it extremely funny. With this whole Facebook culture most people have no idea what a mailing list used to be and how extremely thoughtful yet entertaining comments used to be posted in the olden days [^unixtheism]. The book is a compilation of messages to one such mailing list `UNIX-HATERS`. Understanding most jokes would require a working knowledge of Unix commands. The book is now a bit dated and many such issues no longer apply to the current Linux distributions ^[Except for the `X Windows` system and the `rm` command, maybe.] but it remains an interesting account of the computer technology then and how Microsoft won the enterprise market.

This book reminded me again how one should always remain wary of analogies. See the following excerpt from the _handbook_:

> The Unix "power tool" metaphor is a canard. It's nothing more than a slogan behind which Unix hides its arcane patchwork of commands and adhoc utilities. A real power tool amplifies the power of its user with little additional effort or instruction. Anyone capable of using screwdriver or drill can use a power screwdriver or power drill. The user needs no understanding of electricity, motors, torquing, magnetism, heat dissipation, or maintenance. She just needs to plug it in, wear safety glasses, and pull the trigger. Most people even dispense with the safety glasses. It's rare to find a power tool that is fatally flawed in the hardware store: most badly designed power tools either don't make it to market or result in costly lawsuits, removing them from the market and punishing their makers. 

Compare it with this excerpt from **Stephenson's** _In The Beginning Was the Command Line_ (another must read):

> The Hole Hawg is a drill made by the Milwaukee Tool Company. If you look in a typical hardware store you may find smaller Milwaukee drills but not the Hole Hawg, which is too powerful and too expensive for homeowners. The Hole Hawg does not have the pistol-like design of a cheap homeowner's drill. It is a cube of solid metal with a handle sticking out of one face and a chuck mounted in another. The cube contains a disconcertingly potent electric motor. You can hold the handle and operate the trigger with your index finger, but unless you are exceptionally strong you cannot control the weight of the Hole Hawg with one hand; it is a two-hander all the way. In order to fight off the counter-torque of the Hole Hawg you use a separate handle (provided), which you screw into one side of the iron cube or the other depending on whether you are using your left or right hand to operate the trigger. This handle is not a sleek, ergonomically designed item as it would be in a homeowner's drill. It is simply a foot-long chunk of regular galvanized pipe, threaded on one end, with a black rubber handle on the other. If you lose it, you just go to the local plumbing supply store and buy another chunk of pipe. During the Eighties I did some construction work. One day, another worker leaned a ladder against the outside of the building that we were putting up, climbed up to the second-story level, and used the Hole Hawg to drill a hole through the exterior wall. At some point, the drill bit caught in the wall. The Hole Hawg, following its one and only imperative, kept going. It spun the worker's body around like a rag doll, causing him to knock his own ladder down. Fortunately he kept his grip on the Hole Hawg, which remained lodged in the wall, and he simply dangled from it and shouted for help until someone came along and reinstated the ladder. I myself used a Hole Hawg to drill many holes through studs, which it did as a blender chops cabbage. I also used it to cut a few six-inch-diameter holes through an old lath-and-plaster ceiling. I chucked in a new hole saw, went up to the second story, reached down between the newly installed floor joists, and began to cut through the first-floor ceiling below. Where my homeowner's drill had labored and whined to spin the huge bit around, and had stalled at the slightest obstruction, the Hole Hawg rotated with the stupid consistency of a spinning planet. When the hole saw seized up, the Hole Hawg spun itself and me around, and crushed one of my hands between the steel pipe handle and a joist, producing a few lacerations, each surrounded by a wide corona of deeply bruised flesh. It also bent the hole saw itself, though not so badly that I couldn't use it. After a few such run-ins, when I got ready to use the Hole Hawg my heart actually began to pound with atavistic terror. But I never blamed the Hole Hawg; I blamed myself. The Hole Hawg is dangerous because it does exactly what you tell it to. It is not bound by the physical limitations that are inherent in a cheap drill, and neither is it limited by safety interlocks that might be built into a homeowner's product by a liability-conscious manufacturer. The danger lies not in the machine itself but in the user's failure to envision the full consequences of the instructions he gives to it. A smaller tool is dangerous too, but for a completely different reason: it tries to do what you tell it to, and fails in some way that is unpredictable and almost always undesirable. But the Hole Hawg is like the genie of the ancient fairy tales, who carries out his master's instructions literally and precisely and with unlimited power, often with disastrous, unforeseen consequences. Pre-Hole Hawg, I used to examine the drill selection in hardware stores with what I thought was a judicious eye, scorning the smaller low-end models and hefting the big expensive ones appreciatively, wishing I could afford one of them babies. Now I view them all with such contempt that I do not even consider them to be real drills--merely scaled-up toys designed to exploit the self-delusional tendencies of soft-handed homeowners who want to believe that they have purchased an actual tool. Their plastic casings, carefully designed and focus-group-tested to convey a feeling of solidity and power, seem disgustingly flimsy and cheap to me, and I am ashamed that I was ever bamboozled into buying such knicknacks. It is not hard to imagine what the world would look like to someone who had been raised by contractors and who had never used any drill other than a Hole Hawg. Such a person, presented with the best and most expensive hardware-store drill, would not even recognize it as such. He might instead misidentify it as a child's toy, or some kind of motorized screwdriver. If a salesperson or a deluded homeowner referred to it as a drill, he would laugh and tell them that they were mistaken--they simply had their terminology wrong. His interlocutor would go away irritated, and probably feeling rather defensive about his basement full of cheap, dangerous, flashy, colorful tools. \\
> Unix is the Hole Hawg of operating systems, and Unix hackers, like Doug Barnes and the guy in the Dilbert cartoon and many of the other people who populate Silicon Valley, are like contractor's sons who grew up using only Hole Hawgs. They might use Apple/Microsoft OSes to write letters, play video games, or balance their checkbooks, but they cannot really bring themselves to take these operating systems seriously. 

Same thing - "machine tool" yet wildly opposite interpretations.


[^unixtheism]: Consider this message for example:

    > It works like this. Sun has this spiffy network file system. Unfortunately, it doesn't have any real theory of access control. This is partly because Unix doesn't have one either. It has two levels: mortal and God. God (i.e., root) can do anything. The problem is that networks make things polytheistic: Should my workstation's God be able to turn your workstation into a pillar of salt? Well gee, that depends on whether my God and your God are on good terms or maybe are really just the SAME God. This is a deep and important theological question that has puzzled humankind for millenia. \ \
    > "The Sun kernel has a user-patchable cosmology. It contains a poly-  theism bit called "nobody." When network file requests come in from root (i.e., God), it maps them to be requests from the value of the kernel variable "nobody" which as distributed is set to -1 which by convention corresponds to no user whatsoever, rather than to 0, the binary representation of God (*). The default corresponds to a basically Greek pantheon in which there are many Gods and they're all trying to screw each other (both literally and figuratively in the Greek case). However, by using adb to set the kernel variable "nobody" to 0 in the divine boot image, you can move to a Ba'hai cosmology in which all Gods are really manifestations of the One Root God, Zero, thus inventing monotheism. \
    > Thus when the manifestation of the divine spirit, binmail, attempts to create a mailbox on a remote server on a monotheistic Unix, it will be able to invoke the divine change-owner command so as to make it profane enough for you to touch it without spontaneously combusting and having your eternal soul damned to hell. On a polytheistic Unix, the divine binmail isn't divine so your mail file gets created by "nobody" and when binmail invokes the divine change-owner command, it is returned an error code which it forgets to check, knowing that it is, in fact, infallible. \ \
    > So, patch the kernel on the file server or run sendmail"

    I would sincerely like to be enlightened of such comments anywhere on the current social networks. I do remember seeing some on Twitter. But they are limited to 140 words.

