---
title: I can't think of emulating Steve Jobs
description: Where I rant about Steve Jobs
author: rejuvyesh
status: finished
belief: likely
tags: technology, capitalism
---

Here I sit all alone in the lab on a Sunday, the sun gradually setting, with speakers blaring with songs being played [randomly](https://github.com/rejuvyesh/Scripts/blob/master/mpd-random) from my music library while waiting for my code to finish running. I wonder what kind of a person does it make me to like this environment and work hard to be able to get back to the same.

With this Oreo fueled free time on hand, I don't know why, maybe because I was looking for mp3 players instead of reading internet articles, I remembered how much Steve Job's been eulogized as an innovator. Maybe I was reminded of this because of the number of apple products I have seen here. So many people have android here in US. I see him more of a popularizer of technology, a person who could take the expensive prototypes at the Xerox labs and put less expensive versions into the hands of ordinary people. People were writing how Steve Jobs and his products have improved their lives. Yeah many people agreed that he was unscrupulous and more of an asshole and maybe that is what it takes to gather the power to change the world?

This reminded me of something I had read sometime ago when reading about why Beatles songs were almost never available for streaming on any service. You might be surprised to know that the Beatles founded a media company **Apple Corps.** in 1968 --- eight years and three months before **Apple Computer** _and_ in 1978 Apple Corp filed a [trademark infringement suit](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Apple_Corps_v._Apple_Computer) against Apple Computer, which settled up by paying Apple Corps $80,000 and promising _never_ to enter the music business. Apple then went right ahead and _entered the music business_ and became the world's leading music company as well. Of course, further settlements were reached that made this retroactively agreed to. But isn't it extremely bad faith to do something wrong on the theory that you'll generate enough money to pay off the people you've wronged? I guess this is what we get if we have no holds barred capitalism which rewards the most unscrupulous of people?

To people who think all this was necessary to gain the power to change lives of people, we have the counter example of [Tim Berners-Lee](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tim_Berners-Lee), who invented the World-Wide-Web and brought the esoteric technology of internet to the masses. ^[It's important to understand that technically world wide web is just a small part of the vast internet which still has a large bunch of dark corners and protocols.] He doesn't demand royalty each time we use the web. Yes he is not a billionaire like Jobs but I think that is my point. Being a billionaire did not save Jobs form his pancreatic cancer? I personally don't think I want this money based scoreboard to define my every action. Maybe that's why I can't think of ever trying to emulate him.


**P.S.** : Ah found it. I thought I have had these thoughts earlier as well. I had read most of what's written above at [adamcadre](http://adamcadre.ac/calendar/13/13758.html). I am really surprised I internalized this so well and forgot about the mental dissonance of Job's professed religion Buddhism:

> Apple's monopolistic, unscrupulous behavior suggests the mind of a grasping arch-capitalist behind it, and the capitalist answer to "Why build Planet Apple?" is simple. Tim Berners-Lee has made a few million dollars, much of it in the form of prizes from grateful humanitarian organizations. Steve Jobs made eight billion. Scoreboard. This is how you win at life. But Steve Jobs — as I learned with no small amount of mental whiplash — professed to be a Buddhist, and Buddhism's answer to the question of how to "win" at life is rather different. The First Noble Truth of Buddhism is that life is characterized by suffering. Yes, money can stave off some sources of suffering. With enough money, you needn't be hungry. You needn't be too hot or too cold. If you have a minor illness you can afford to get it treated. But if you contract pancreatic cancer... $8 billion isn't enough to make you well. And no matter how much Herman Cain and his ilk may thunder that we get what we deserve and "if you don't have a job and you are not rich, blame yourself!", life is largely a lottery. The amount anyone suffers is basically random; suffering can be thrust upon you in the form of childhood abuse, or being born into poverty, or a privileged life interrupted by a horrible wasting illness out of the blue. So if you know that the power of money to stave off suffering is limited — and that, as the Second Noble Truth teaches, attachment to the pleasures it can afford is itself a cause of suffering — why take aggressive steps to amass a fortune?
> Maybe the money was just a side effect — maybe Planet Apple was about control. You have to listen to I-Tunes songs through the I-Tunes player, not because it'll nudge you into buying an I-Pod, but just because I want you to do things my way. I've seen this attitude ascribed to Steve Jobs a time or twenty. But, again, that strikes me as almost the antithesis of Buddhism. I know that there is a universe of variation within any given religion, but still, right there in the foundational tenets of Buddhism are the notions that, one, the demand that things be a certain way is itself a source of suffering as that demand cannot always be fulfilled, and two, the cessation of suffering is brought about in part by letting go of that demand. This is awesomely difficult and something I know I'll never achieve. But I don't understand how someone could even pay lip service to these principles while his company's practices constitute such a decisive rejection of them.

BTW, there's been quite a few subtle changes in website's layout. Do let me know if the earlier iteration was better or some other stuff requires change as well.

And yeah it's been a long time since I posted anything, so I'll not just scrap all I've written or just ask you to follow the link. Also I think Apple might be changing for the better with [Tim Cook](http://stratechery.com/2014/steve-jobs-wouldnt-done/) at the helm.
